---
title: The problem with WebHooks
description: "" 
tags: 
---

We see more and more REST APIs that contains "callbacks".
Those are also named "webhooks".
For example, the GitHub API contains webhooks able to trigger processes when a commit is pushed:

```

```

However, the problem with webhooks is that they don't scale well.
The problem is similar for any kind of callback.
For example, GUI programming usually have a lot of callbacks: some actions need to be triggered when the user inputs some data on the GUI.
So it's common practice to register a callback for every user action on the GUI.
However, for complex GUI things becomes messy quickly.
First of all, all those callbacks scater the code in different places.
But more importantly, for complex actions the callbacks need to communicate between them.

For example, imagine that the GUI needs to send an output if user 1 AND user 2 click on a button.
In this case, each callback need to first check the status of the other callback before sending the output.
This can be done via some sort of global variable, but global variables are usually bad practice.
Furthermore, the logic is hidden: it is not clear which callback wrote in the variable.

A usual answer for the problem of the callbacks is Complex Event Programming.
So, let's try to apply this solution in the case of WebHooks as well!

Here are the use cases we'll tackle:
1. A GET end point than fetch data from two other sources and combine the result.
2. A WebHook that will call you back when one POST is effectuated.
3. A WebHook that will call you back when a POST request is done one two different end points.

The first one doesn't require CEP, it can be done directly using the technique described in [this post]().
The second one is a simple forward.
It can be realized with a proxy.

The WebHook structure is as follow (in YAML):
```
WebHook: http://mycallback.com/callback
```

We'll create a webserver, that will expose a REST interface.
This REST interface allows the user to register a callback.

The webserver will register itself on a third party service webhook.
When the third party will call our server, we will call our own registered clients.

Steps necessary:
for the client:
Open a netcat that will just listen for connections and display them

for the server:
Open a netcat that will listen for connections


CEP command line tool:
----------------------


The tool allows to listen on pipes and program a complex behavior between them.
The following programs are possible:

Exemple 1:
```
putPipe3 $ do
  a <- getPipe1
  b <- getPipe2
  return $ (a, b)
```

This program will wait for data from pipe1 AND pipe2.
Once both data has been received, it will push a pair of them to pipe3.


Exemple 2:
```
putPipe3 $ getPipe1 <|> getPipe2
```

This program wait for the first data to arrive in pipe1 OR pipe2.
The first data to arrive will be transmitted to pipe3.

Exemple 3:
```
putPipe4 $ do
  a <- getPipe1
  b <- getPipe2
  c <- getPipe3
  return $ (a, (b, c))
```

This program will wait for data from pipe1 AND pipe2 AND pipe3.


Exemple 4:
```
putPipe3 $ (Just <$ getPipe1) <|> (Nothing <$ (timer 10))
```

This program will put the content of Just pipe 1 if the data arrives before 10 seconds, otherwise it will put Nothing.


I/O formats
-----------

Several I/O formats are possible: line format, file format, json, yaml, Haskell.


*line format:* Each event appear of a separate line.
In practice, this means that events data are terminated by a BR character.
The events data is only typed as String.
This data format doesn't allow structured data: only flat structures are possible.


*file format:* Each event is separated by an EOF character.
The behaviour is the same than the previous.

*json/yaml formats:*
This format allows more complex data structures.
It's easy to serialize from Haskell structures to/from json.


Full Webhook program
--------------------


