---
title: This blog
description: some comments on this blog
---

I started this blog to share some of my ideas and passions!
Hope you like it. I'm trying to keep with the rythm of one (elaborated) post per month.

The technology
--------------

This blog uses Hakyll, a static blog generator in Haskell.
The blog posts are written in markdown and stored in [GitHub](https://github.com/cdupont/CorentinDupont-WebPage), allong all the rest of the website.
They are rendered by Haskyll: after typing a blog post I simply type `site build; site deploy`.
No database! This is a great advantage because when you store your posts in a database, you never know in which format they are stored.
There is much more chance to loose them.
Writing them in markdown and storing them on your computer synchronised with GitHub makes them much more reusable.

* For posts embedding math equations such as [this one](2014-12-08-Car.html), I use MathJax, as described in this [post](http://travis.athougies.net/posts/2013-08-13-using-math-on-your-hakyll-blog.html).
* For posts embedding graphics such as plots, I write them in [Rmarkdown](http://rmarkdown.rstudio.com) and then transform them in plain markdown with the command:

```sh
Rscript -e "library(knitr); knit('myPost.Rmd')"
```

* For [posts](2014-02-17-Cretan-Maze.html) embedding Haskell code, I write them in literate Haskell (.lhs), which is also supported by Hakyll. I can then either render them in Hakyll, or run then with ghc!
Unfortunately for the moment I didn't find a way to "weave" the post, that is to run the code snippets that are included and insert automatically the corresponding output (in this case a picture).
