---
title: Using vim as a IDE
description: 
tags: 
---

Vim is now my single editor for programming.
A good IDE should support the following features, among others:

- navigate through the files of your project
- search files by name
- search in files
- open file which name is under cursor
- compile your project and display the error message, in parallel with the faulty source file

Basic vim is missing some of those features, so until now I used it only for very small projects.
However with some setup you can manage to use it efficiently also for big programming projects!

Navigate files
--------------

To navigate through the files of your project, you can simply use this built-in feature: Explorer.
You can start it with the command ':E' or ':Explorer'.
The navigation is then entirely done with the keyboard.

An alternative is to use the [NERD tree](http://www.vim.org/scripts/script.php?script_id=1658) extension.

Search files by name
--------------------

If you already the name of the file that you want to edit and just want to jump to it, use the [ctrlp](https://github.com/ctrlpvim/ctrlp.vim) extension.
Ctrlp is a fuzzy file finder, that will open with the command 'Ctrl-P' on the keyboard.
It can find instantly files using only part of their names, also with typos.
It present a list of files found, that you can then open.

Search in files
---------------

To search a word in multiple files, I use the [Ag extention](https://robots.thoughtbot.com/faster-grepping-in-vim).
Binding it to the '\' key allows for quick search.


Open file which name is under cursor
------------------------------------

Source code often include file names in the text (such as 'include' or 'import' commands).
It would be handy to be able to navigate to them...
This feature is already supported by vim: place your cursor on top of an import file name, type `gf` (goto file) and it will open.


Compile / display error messages
--------------------------------

To perform any shell work, such as compiling, while keeping in parallel the source code open, I installed [tmux](https://tmux.github.io/).
I allows you to have nice side-by-side terminal windows.
Once in tmux, do: `ctrl-a %` to split vertically the terminal, then `ctrl-a left-arrow` to switch windows.
One windows will be dedicated to compilation, while the other is used for source code browsing.
vim will not switch automatically to the file under error, however using Crl-P to find the file and then :<line number> to jump the the error line does the trick.

This setting is not specific to any programming language, so it will work will all of them!
